# Active and Contemplative Modes

Learning anything new requires harnessing two distinct, competing modes of
working.
The _contemplative_ mode values understanding and strives to build grand,
coherent structures capable of explaining.
The _active_ mode wants to _do_ something, and usually _make_ something.
If the contemplative mode has a motto, it's some abstruse three-word Latin
phrase; the active mode's mantra is undoubtedly, _"get shit done"_.

Clearly these two are in tension.
The contemplative mode sees the active mode as a lower primate that somehow
learned to use power tools.
The active mode retorts, saying, "what have you done lately?"

But they're both necessary for long-term growth.
Without the synthesizing efforts of the contemplative mode, the active mode must
rely on luck for new ideas.
The contemplative mode without the active mode is the cognitive equivalent of
trying to get stronger by watching somebody else deadlift.

So the million-dollar question is this: how do we bring these two forces into
harmony?
How do you get two experts from competing fields, both of whom despise each
other, to work together?

One possible answer is that _you don't_.
You let the active mode do its thing for a while, and only once it's worn out
do you bring the contemplative mode in to try and make something of the
situation.
At some point the contemplative mode will run out of ideas and need a break, at
which point the well-rested active mode can be brought back into play.

Of course this strategy is nothing new.
But it's one thing to be aware of it, and another thing entirely to put it into
practice.
To that end I've started paying more attention to the mode I'm operating in.
This usually isn't that difficult to discern: if my handwriting is crisp and
confident, I'm almost certainly in contemplative mode; if I'm frantically
searching `man` pages or StackOverflow/Exchange, or have more than 3 browser
tabs open, I'm in active mode.
With this awareness in hand I try and exhaust the current mode, staying in
active mode until it gets tired, or contemplative mode until it's out of ideas.
